bousse/gemoc-studio/README.md, before:

# GEMOC Studio

## Installation

The folder `studios`contains compiled and off-the-shelf GEMOC Studios for all platforms. Please unzip the archive corresponding to your platform to start using the GEMOC Studio.

The folder `examples` contains one example per engine. Each example contains one language and one model.

## Playing with the engines

Thereafter, we present simplified tutorials to play with each execution engine of the GEMOC studio, and with the corresponding relevant addons.

### Java engine

1. Import example language
2. Start modeling workbench
3. Import model
4. Execute model in debug mode
5. Look at XXX and YYY

TODO

### Java+MoCCML engine

1. Import example language
2. Start modeling workbench
3. Import model
4. Execute model in debug mode
5. Look at XXX and YYY

TODO

### xMOF engine

1. Import example language
2. Start modeling workbench
3. Import model
4. Execute model in debug mode
5. Look at XXX and YYY

TODO

### BCOoL engine

1. Import example language
2. Start modeling workbench
3. Import model
4. Execute model in debug mode
5. Look at XXX and YYY

TODO

Commit message:

Replace studio README by common recipe for all languages

bousse/gemoc-studio/README.md, after:

# GEMOC Studio

## Installation

The folder `studios`contains compiled and off-the-shelf GEMOC Studios for all platforms. Please unzip the archive corresponding to your platform to start using the GEMOC Studio.

The folder `examples` contains one example per engine. Each example contains one language and one model.

## Playing with the engines

Thereafter, we present simplified tutorials to play with each execution engine of the GEMOC studio, and with the corresponding relevant addons.

### Common recipe

1. Start the GEMOC Studio in a fresh workspace.
1. Import the example xDSML by doing *File, *Import..*, *Existing Projects into Workspace*, and choose the folder `language-workbench` of the considered engine. Select all the projects and click on *Finish*.
2. Start a modeling workbench for the xDSML by creating a new eclipse run configuration:
	a. Click on *Run*, *Run Configurations...*.
	b. Right click on *Eclipse Application* and choose *New*.
	c. Click on *Run*.
3. Import the example model of the considered engine by using the same procedure as for importing the language, but by choosing the folder `modeling-workbench`.
4. Execute the model in debug mode: TODO

### Java engine

TODO

### Java+MoCCML engine

TODO

### xMOF engine

TODO

### BCOoL engine

TODO
